All right, so
next is the prototype pattern.
And this is probably a pattern that
you have used many times when working
with JavaScript, but
you may not have known it.
So what we saw with the factory
pattern is that it's pretty
easy to have many of the same objects.
For example, in this example, we have
a factory function like createDog [LAUGH].
So we wanna create many dogs,
maybe we have a name and an age.
And also, all dogs can bark when
we console the name is barking,
and we have wagTail.
Now, this is totally doable.
It's fine, this works.
However, what's happening here is that
whenever we are creating those new
objects, for every object,
we're also allocating memory for
all the functions here.
So even though the whack tail and
bark functions are identical for
all the objects, we're still allocating
new memory for each and every one of them.
So this is not very memory efficient.
Now, instead,
what we can do in JavaScript is use
something called the prototype pattern.
And this is where the classes come in,
because everything on a class that's
defined directly on the body is
considered to be a part of the prototype.
And the constructor is the individual,
or the unique object that gets returned.
So any functionality that is
shared between those many
objects can be defined on the class body.
So what we see here is that we've now
moved the bark and the wagTail methods.
Instead of having them directly
on these objects that we created,
we now go up the prototype chain,
as to say, or go down to prototype chain.
People use them synonymously.
And instead,
it's now on that dog prototype.
So whenever we invoke a function here,
I think this is just an example.
So we can just say a dog1 or
2, and then bark index.js.
So you can see here that
we've created many new
dog instances that just say name, age.
Actually, I will show this in a browser
console, because they're just a bit
better at showing the prototype, so
you can kind of see what's going on here.
I'll just open it in here,
if that's all right.
I'm just going to do, Okay,
so we've just created many new dogs,
again, dog1 and dog2.
So when we just logged dog1, you can
see that there's only name and age.
Now, you might think okay, but
whereas it was bark and wagTail,
cuz we can still use that.
Now, whenever we log this dog again,
I'm just going to clear this
just to make it cleared up.
I'm just going to make this a bit bigger.
You can see that there is a prototype
object, yeah, these logs.
And this prototype object is essentially,
like you can see here,
it looks very familiar to the dog we
just created, cuz we had a constructor.
And then we also added the bark and
wagTail methods to this class object.
So here we can see that bark and wagTail.
Those methods are available
on the prototype.
And this prototype is shared among
all the objects that we just created.
So any dog instance, or
any instance from the class automatically
also has access to those methods.
And we don't have to worry about
allocating a space in memory for
those methods, because we can
just add it to the prototype Now,
yeah, like I said, having that prototype
pattern is extremely memory efficient,
because we don't really have
to worry about duplication.
But you can also extend
classes kind of infinitely.
In which case, it can be pretty difficult
to kind of understand where certain
properties may be coming from.
I don't know if it's clear.
But for example, you have a border collie,
or we have an animal class, and
all animals have a name and a cell counts
that's kind of unique to an animal.
Then we also have mammals.
Now, a mammal is an animal, so it should
have all the properties of an animal, but
a mammal also drinks milk.
So for that specific mammal,
we have to drink milk method.
And then we have canine, which is
a mammal, so it can drink milk, and
it has a name and a cell counts.
And it also has a smell method, and
so on, all the way down to dog,
which can wag its tail, and then
a border collie, which can hurt sheep.
So they get more and
more explicit every time, or unique.
But of course,
if we have that new border collie, and
we get the property cell count, it can
be like, okay, where did that come from?
Is that on the border collie?
And then you have to go all
the way down that prototype chain.
Now, when I said you've probably
used the prototype pattern how many
times before is because whenever we have,
I don't know, any object.
So const person is .
So on this person,
you will also find a person,
because everything that
we create in JavaScript,
or all the objects that
we create in JavaScript
automatically inherit from
that object prototype.
So this is why we have all this
functionality that you may have seen
whenever we're using any type of data type
on an object, like toString or valueOff.
So even though we didn't determine
that on the object itself,
JavaScript has gave that to us because
it's an instance from that object class.
Now the same goes for I think string,
we have all that primitive data types.
I guess if we have name,
I guess you cannot really
see like that in the DevTools we get,
so that has new string.
I think maybe this is a prototype or
something.
I don't know, I don't know how
you can see that in DevTools.
That's essentially where we get
all those built-in methods from,
it's from those primitive
data type prototypes.
So what we saw with factory pattern
before is that it might have been better
if these objects that we created here
had some kind of shared properties.
I'm just trying to find the, yeah, here.
I mean, in here, they're all unique.
So it doesn't necessarily make sense to
use a prototype pattern here because there
is nothing to share
among all those objects.
They all have unique values.
Book Two title is not
the same as Book Three title.
But maybe if they had some kind of method,
I don't know what method could be on
a book, ad sale or something,
or sell, I don't know.
It's something that is
shared among all of them,
then a prototype pattern
would've made sense.
Yeah, so in there are actually many ways
to create a prototype either just with
a class, or with the object.create method.
Yeah, but I'm only showing
examples with a class here,
just because it's a bit more readable,
in my opinion.
Yeah, so
I think then we're done with the exercise.
So we have a factory function here again,
which creates a user, and
we only pass a firstName,
lastName and email.
But on every user,
we also have some functions, or
some methods like checkLastOnline,
sendEmail and delete.
So instead of creating
a factory function here,
I want you to use the prototype pattern
to create those users instead, and
be a bit more memory
efficient with everything.